# World Data League 2022

## Executive Summary Template
This executive summary is one of the mandatory deliverables when you submit your solution. Its structure follows the WDL evaluation criteria and it has dedicated sections where you should add information. Make sure your executive summary covers all the sections since it will be an integral part of the Insights Report and your evaluation. Make sure your content is relevant and straight to the point.
**There is no need to reach the maximum number of words.**

Instructions:

1. 🧱 Create a separate copy of this template and do not change the predefined structure
2. 👥 Fill in the Authors section with the name of each team member
3. ✏️ Write your executive summary - make sure you write to a non-technical crowd. You can refer to images that are in the Submission Notebook.
4. 📄 Fill in all the text sections
5. 🗑️ Remove this section (‘Executive Summary Template’) and any instructions inside other sections
6. ⬆️ Upload the .md file to the submission platform.

## 🎯 Challenge
*Insert challenge name here*

## 👥 Authors
  * Claire Benard
  * Diego Arenas
  * Natalie Muenter
  * Tom Constant
  * Tom Wagstaff

## ✨ Introduction (250 words max)
Provide a contextualization of the problem, together with an estimation of its size using real numbers and references.
*Write here*

## 🔢 Data (250 words max)
Explain what data you used (both provided by WDL and external) and improvements you suggest to those datasets. Explain how those improvements would lead to a better solution.
*Write here*

## 🧮 Methods and Techniques (250 words max)
Tell us what methods and algorithms you used and the results you obtained.
*Write here*

## 💡 Main Insights (300 words max)
Explain what you discovered from addressing this problem, such as interesting facts or statistics.
*Write here*

## 🛠️ Product
### Definition
An app/dashboard with projected waste per day and person in Austin.

### Users
Anyone living in Austin could see in their phone/laptop how much waste they have produced over time and how much waste they will produce in the following years.

### Activities
*Predicts amount of weight(in pounds) per day and person
*Notify the users when the trend is going down or up with some tips and ideas in how to reduce waste at home  

### Output
A dashboard with:
* a dropdown to choose the type of load we want to see or if we want to see it all aggregated
* a plot with historical data and predicted data of amount of waste produced by person
* a infobox with the predicted amount generated by person by 2040 (to see if we reach city's goal) 

## 🌍 Social Impact Measurement
### Outcome
The product has the goal of increasing awareness. Fighting climate change is a team work and the best way of keeping everyone involved is to get them as informed as possible. Being aware of the tons of waste we generate individually could help people being more conscious about the problem.  

### Impact Metrics
* Change in the trend slope 

### Impact Measurement

Based on the predicted waste for garbage collection, by 2040 we will reach close to a 90% reduction from waste produced in 2010 by day and person. Recycling trend goes downwards but the slope is not that accentuated as for garbage collection.  

### Problem
Austin Texas has a goal for a 90% reduction in waste sent to landfill by 2040. Can we predict reductions in waste and create insights to help them hit the goal?

### Method
We all did some EDA on the time series at various levels of granularity. We then took different time series modelling approaches to try to explain the patterns we saw in the data.

### Outline solution
Using Prophet we could create a reasonable forecast of both garbage and recycling waste that had a plausible trend, seasonality and day of week component.
The models suggest that garbage collections are peaking and trending down in line with the 2040 plan - although there might be some influence from the pandemic period.
Conversely, recycling is rising on a steady trend.

We interpret this as positive for Austin's plans and a good proof of concept for decoupling waste from continuing economic and population growth.

Tailored forecasts of this kind - showing you how much waste your community was expected to produce, and how this would be influenced by different policies, could be used for awareness-raising and sharing Austin's model of waste management to other cities.

### Extensions & reflections
We did try some ARIMA modelling which produced plausible forecasts but was not very insightful when it came to trends and drivers.
We think that aggregating the data at a zipcode level instead of city level would have given us some interesting insights, we were not able to do that during the challenge time frame.



